## Files
   * `Week4tidydataset.table` - the tidy dataset in table format as generated by run_analysis.R.  
 
   * `run_analysis.R` - an R script that calculates the average of every mean and standard deviation related measurement and outputs the result in a tidy data format. 

   * `CodeBook.Rmd` - An R Markdown file describing the variables, data, and units. Includes descriptions of what each name means plus additional summary statistics. The CodeBook is also provided in pdf format for easier viewing. 

   * `README.md` - this readme file, describing the files included, information about the tidy dataset and variables, and directions on how to generate the tidy dataset and read it back into R. 

## About the tidy dataset
### > narrow tidy dataset
This dataset fits Hadley Wickham's definition of tidy data as stated in his paper [Tidy Data](https://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf) by possessing the following characteristics:  

1. Each variable is a column
2. Each observation is a row
3. Each type of observational unit is a table

This tidy dataset is in narrow (aka stacked or long) format. _As mentioned in the rubric, the narrow or wide forms are both acceptable_. 

### > variable name choice
Without more detailed instruction than "Extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement", all variables  containing the words 'mean' and 'standard_deviation' were selected. This resulted in 46 'mean' or 'mean_of_mean' values and 33 values that referenced 'std_dev' (standard deviation). These values are described in more detail in CodeBook.Rmd.

### > descriptive value names
The variable names were renamed to be longer and more descriptive than the originals, which were truncated with the apparent goal of being as short as possible. 
* The renamed values all start with 'mean' or 'std_dev' since these are indicative of the type of value contained in the column. 
* 'mean' and 'std_dev' are followed by either 'time' or 'frequency' as these are the two types of values within the broader statistical measurement categories. 
* 'time' and 'frequency' are further subdivided into 'body' and 'gravity' as the two elements being measured. 
* 'body' and 'gravity' are then subdivided into 'acceleration' and 'gyroscope'.  
* Finally 'acceleration' and 'angular velocity' are broken down by 'jerk' and 'magnitude' and include the axis of each measurement. 

The result is a variable name that explains the following:   

[ statistical measure ][ time or frequency ][ body or gravity ][ acceleration or angular_velocity ][ jerk or magnitude ][ axis ]

## R Script Execution

1. To execute run_analysis.R, ensure that the working directory is set correctly in the R code (line 16) so that the code can successfully locate the test/ and train/ directories. 

2. Execute the script by clicking on the 'Source' icon in RStudio


### Reading the tidy dataset table into R

1. The output of run_analysis.R is included in a file named  `Week4tidydataset.txt`.  

2. Read this table into R with the following two commands at the RStudio console. 

```
data <- read.table("path/to/Week4tidydataset.table", header=TRUE)
View(data)
```

